[SYCL][Doc] Add proposed sycl_ext_oneapi_spirv_queries spec (#19435)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_spirv_queries.asciidoc

=== Feature test macro

This extension provides a feature-test macro as described in the core SYCL
specification.
An implementation supporting this extension must predefine the macro
`SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_SPIRV_QUERIES`
to one of the values defined in the table below.
Applications can test for the existence of this macro to determine if the
implementation supports this feature, or applications can test the macro's
value to determine which of the extension's features the implementation
supports.

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value
|Description

|1
|The APIs of this experimental extension are not versioned, so the
 feature-test macro always has this value.
|===

=== Queries

==== New member functions for the device class

This extension also adds the following member functions to the `device` class,
which allow the application to query whether the device supports SPIR-V queries,
and if so, which SPIR-V extended instruction sets, extensions, and capabilities
the device supports.

|====
a|
[frame=all,grid=none]
!====
a!
[source]
----
class device {
  bool ext_oneapi_supports_spirv_queries() const;
};
----
!====

_Returns:_ The value `true` if the device supports SPIR-V queries.

> Returns `false` if the device does not support SPIR-V.

Reviewer: I think we should not have this query.  Instead, I think any implementation that supports this extension must support this query on all of its devices.  I understand that this puts more of a burden on implementors, but I think it makes life easier for application developers.

Note that we do not have any similar query like this for OpenCL in [sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_compiler_opencl](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/c5c8cf23d8d444f14d5c24e2673e857fa7e74bfe/sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_spirv_queries.asciidoc).  Instead, we assume that any implementation that supports that extension also supports the queries.

Reviewer 2: I agree that there being two ways to get to "false" is bad design and potentially misleading.

Is there a reason we couldn't do this via an aspect, and turn these queries into optional features?  Specifically, I am suggesting that:
- We add `aspect::spirv` to identify devices that support launching kernels written in SPIR-V.
- Remove `ext_oneapi_supports_spirv_queries()`, in favor of `device.has(aspect::spirv)`.
- Say that the other queries throw an exception if the device doesn't have `aspect::spirv`.

Reviewer: I have a slight preference for @Pennycook's proposal, but I'd name the aspect `aspect::spirv_queries` (well, really `aspect::ext_oneapi_spirv_queries`).  This is because a backend / device might support SPIR-V kernels, but still not support the queries.  I believe this is the case that @bashbaug is concerned about.

This design would allow the application to decide whether it wanted to test the aspect, or whether it wanted to assume that all devices it cares about will always support the queries.  If the application's assumption is wrong, they will get an obvious `feature_not_supported` exception, and then they will know they need to test the aspect.

I would also define the queries to return `false` if the device does not support SPIR-V at all (e.g. a CUDA device).  If a device does not support SPIR-V, then it clearly does not support any SPIR-V extensions or capabilities.  We don't need any special backend support to know that.

Reviewer: I didn't see your comment @bashbaug until after I wrote mine.  I think we are on the same page.

What do you think of my last paragraph?

Author: > I think we are on the same page.

Yes, I think we are aligned, great minds think alike!

> What do you think of my last paragraph?

I think it's fine, though I also don't think we need to say anything specific about it.  A device that doesn't support SPIR-V at all could return that it has `aspect::spirv_queries`, then unconditionally return `false` for each of the queries, and this could be a valid implementation.

FWIW, some applications might find it confusing for a device to have `aspect::spirv_queries` but not support SPIR-V at all, but we don't _need_ to couple the two.

Interestingly, there is an open discussion in the CTS PR for the OpenCL extension whether it makes sense to support the extension without supporting SPIR-V: https://github.com/KhronosGroup/OpenCL-CTS/pull/2409#discussion_r2164989935

Reviewer 2: I'm not opposed to splitting the aspect in two, but I'd like to test something.

Because SYCL is a higher-level abstraction, I think it's nice sometimes to hide some of the complexity by bundling certain features and/or assuming a certain level of support.  If/when the SPIR-V queries become supported widely, or perhaps even become a core/optional feature of OpenCL instead of an extension, would it then be acceptable for `aspect::spirv` to require an implementation of these queries?

I understand the motivation for keeping things separate while the extension is new -- because otherwise a lot of devices would be prevented from reporting `aspect::spirv` -- but I'd like to avoid death by a million extensions in the long-term.

Reviewer: Oh, I guess you're right that we also need an `aspect::spirv` query.  TBH, I was just focused on the extension queries, so I wasn't thinking that applications would need to know whether the device supports SPIR-V at all.  Our original motivation was users that dynamically load a kernel written in SPIR-V via [sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_compiler_spirv](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_compiler_spirv.asciidoc).  Those users don't need `aspect::spirv` because they can use `ext_oneapi_can_build(source_language::spirv)` instead.  However, we later added the use case where an application codes a kernel mostly in SYCL, but wants to use a SPIR-V intrinsic.  That use case doesn't use the kernel compiler, so they would need `aspect::spirv`.

> I think it's nice sometimes to hide some of the complexity by bundling certain features and/or assuming a certain level of support.

This was exactly my point when I started this comment thread!  I was originally hoping that DPC++ could just require an updated driver when it started supporting this extension.  In that case, it could be considered a "required" feature instead of an "optional" one.  However, I then realized that we need to support the LTS driver, which will not have the necessary support.  Thus, I think it needs to be an optional feature, with an associated aspect.

Yes, I think that eventually we could say that the query is a required feature, in which case the aspect will be guaranteed to return `true` for all devices.

Reviewer: Responding to @bashbaug 

> I think it's fine, though I also don't think we need to say anything specific about it. A device that doesn't support SPIR-V at all could return that it has `aspect::spirv_queries`, then unconditionally return `false` for each of the queries, and this could be a valid implementation.

I think the spec does need to say one way or the other.  Consider the following use case:

* Application defines two variants of a kernel: one that is plain SYCL and one that uses SPIR-V capability "foo".
* Application tests `dev::ext_oneapi_supports_spirv_capability(foo)` to decide whether it is safe to submit the "foo" variant of the kernel.

I think the spec should make it clear whether this is well-defined in the case when the device does not support SPIR-V at all.  We wouldn't want the behavior to be implementation-defined.

With my proposed wording, this would be well-defined, and the code would be safe even when some devices don't support SPIR-V.  Without that wording, the application would need an extra check for `aspect::spirv`.

Author: Apologies for the delay.  I added device aspects for `aspect::ext_oneapi_spirv` and `aspect::ext_oneapi_spirv_queries`, as discussed in this conversation, and I think it worked out well.

I do have one question, though: Instead of throwing an exception when performing a query when the aspects are not supported, I think it makes more sense to just return the empty set (or otherwise "false"), indicating that the feature is not supported.  This avoids needing to describe any invalid combinations of device aspects and seems to be consistent with parts of the SYCL 2020 spec, e.g. querying [info::device::double_fp_config](https://registry.khronos.org/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html#api:info-device-double-fp-config) returns an empty vector when double-precision is not supported vs. throwing an execption.  Is this OK, or should these cases throw an exception instead?

The one potentially weird situation if we do not throw an exception is when a device supports `aspect::ext_oneapi_spirv` but not `aspect::ext_oneapi_spirv_queries`, because the queries for things like supported SPIR-V capabilities will return an empty set even though obviously _some_ SPIR-V capabilities are supported.  If an application wants to guard against this, though, it's easy to test for `aspect::ext_oneapi_spirv_queries` first, and all of the other combinations of supported aspects should "just work" as expected.

a|
[frame=all,grid=none]
!====
a!
[source]
----
class device {
  bool ext_oneapi_supports_spirv_extended_instruction_set(
    const std::string &name) const;

> };

Reviewer: I think we discussed this earlier when we added the OpenCL queries.  My recollection is that we thought that SYCL was higher level then OpenCL, so it made sense to expose a more friendly API.  I think `ext_oneapi_supports_spirv_extended_instruction_set` is more friendly than returning a list of instruction sets.  If we returned a list, applications would need to search through that list in order to decide whether they can safely use a SPIR-V extended instruction.

> };

Reviewer 2: But, conversely, if a developer wants to print all of the supported instruction sets, the proposed SYCL API requires them to maintain a list of all possible values, and then iterate through that list to check whether each value is supported. Building up the list that way seems especially silly if we expect the lower-level APIs will be returning a list for each query.

I think I would prefer if we had both, defined something like:

> `std::set<std::string> device::get_info<sycl::ext::oneapi::spirv_extended_instruction_sets>();`
> 
> _Returns_: A set of all SPIR-V instruction sets supported by this device.
> _Throws_: An exception with the `feature_unsupported` error code if this device does not have the `spirv_queries` aspect.
> 
> `bool device::supports_spirv_extended_instruction_set(const std::string& name);`
> _Returns_: Equivalent to `return device.get_info<sycl::ext::oneapi::spirv_extended_instruction_sets>().contains(name);`

An added bonus of this is we don't have to explicitly explain what `true` and `false` mean, because that can be inferred from the behavior of `contains`.

---

Aside: Looking at this in the context of the OpenCL compiler extension, I think there might also be a way to combine the extensions. I'm not super keen to add a bunch of separate "supports_X", "supports_Y" functions for everything, when we could achieve the same thing with a single `supports` function, but I'm happy to defer that discussion or capture it as an issue.

> };

Reviewer: I'm not opposed to adding the `get_info` specializations.  As you say, it would be easy to implement.  Of course, we would need three of them to return: extended instructions sets, extensions, and capabilities.

As an aside, do we really need a separate query for extensions?  Wouldn't it be better for users to query on the capabilities?  Why would a user want to query the extension instead?

> };

Author: I added the `get_info` specializations, as discussed in this conversation.  I think it worked well.

Noting for completeness: the specializations currently returning a `std::set`, not an `std::vector` like most of the other queries in the SYCL spec.  This is necessary to make the `contains` equivalent work, and it should otherwise be fine since there shouldn't be any duplicate items.  If we want to switch back to a `std::vector` instead though, this is easy enough to do, I'll just need to find a different way to describe the equivalent for the "support" functions.

Alternatively, we could just remove the "support" functions, since I'm not sure how much they're adding now, other than consistency with [sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_compiler_opencl](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_compiler_opencl.asciidoc).

----
!====

_Returns:_ The value `true` if the device supports SPIR-V binary modules that
import the SPIR-V extended instruction set identified by `name`.

> Returns `false` if the device does not support SPIR-V queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Returns `false` if the device does not support kernels written in SPIR-V.
```

Consistent with my comment above, I'd change this last sentence like this.  Same for the two queries below too.

extension to ensure that a SYCL device supports the features required by a
SPIR-V binary module.

== Specification

=== Feature test macro

This extension provides a feature-test macro as described in the core SYCL
specification.
An implementation supporting this extension must predefine the macro
`SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_SPIRV_QUERIES`
to one of the values defined in the table below.
Applications can test for the existence of this macro to determine if the
implementation supports this feature, or applications can test the macro's
value to determine which of the extension's features the implementation
supports.

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value
|Description

|1
|The APIs of this experimental extension are not versioned, so the
 feature-test macro always has this value.
|===

=== Device aspects

This extension adds the following new device aspects.

|====
a|
[frame=all,grid=none]
!====
a!
[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl {

enum class aspect : /* unspecified */ {
  ...
  ext_oneapi_spirv,
  ext_oneapi_spirv_queries
}

} // namespace sycl
----
!====

.*aspect::ext_oneapi_spirv*
Indicates that the device supports compiling and launching kernels written in

> SPIR-V and queries for supported SPIR-V versions.

Author: > I guess you did not do it this way, though, because our existing drivers already have the necessary support to query the supported SPIR-V versions?

Correct.  This is a little weird and asymmetric, but I think it's useful enough to outweigh the asymmetry.

.*aspect::ext_oneapi_spirv_queries*
Indicates that the device supports queries for supported SPIR-V extended
instruction sets, extensions, and capabilities.
|====

=== Queries

==== New SPIR-V version type

This extension adds the following type and constant definitions to
identify a SPIR-V version.

|====
a|
[frame=all,grid=none]
!====
a!
[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

struct spirv_version {
  uint16_t major;

>   uint16_t minor;

Reviewer: I feel like we use these fixed-width types too much in the SYCL spec.  Technically, a C++ implementation isn't even required to provide them.  I think it would be better to either rely on bitfields like:

```
struct spirv_version {
  unsigned major:16;
  unsigned minor:16;
};
```

Or just use a fundamental type that is guaranteed to be at least 16 bits:

```
struct spirv_version {
  unsigned short major;
  unsigned short minor;
};
```

The same for "capability", where I think we could use `unsigned long` instead.

Reviewer 2: I think the "at least 16 bits" part is surprising, though, and may lead to potentially weird behavior.  If a host defines "short" as 32-bit, then the device compiler has to be configured to use that.  With the fixed types it's much clearer that things are intended to be 16 bits and should be 16 bits everywhere.

For a type like this it might not matter so much, because `spirv_version` probably won't cross the host-device boundary.  I'm just mentioning this because I would personally like to see us continue to use fixed-width types in other extensions.

Author: Note: I'd strongly prefer not to switch "capability" to `unsigned long` though, since the size of an `unsigned long` is not fixed on some platforms.  I think this is OK since `uint32_t` is used in many other places in the SYCL spec.

Reviewer 2: Supporting anything across Windows/Linux is a pain for reasons beyond just types, so I agree that people will expect weirdness and be happy to handle it in that case.

The reason I don't like the variable-width types in SYCL specifically is that it's supposed to be portable, and the compiler might end up making surprising decisions that go against a developer's intent.  Theoretically, a developer could write and tune a GPU kernel on a specific combination of OS and device (say, Linux + an Intel GPU), move to another system that they think looks very similar (same OS, same GPU, same compiler, but different host CPU) and the size of all their types could change. Types suddenly getting bigger could impact a kernel's performance (e.g., because it now needs more registers) or even prevent a kernel from working (e.g., because it now needs more work-group local memory than the device has).

FWIW, this isn't a problem in OpenCL because the types are not defined in terms of minimum width (see [here](https://registry.khronos.org/OpenCL/specs/3.0-unified/html/OpenCL_C.html#built-in-scalar-data-types)): in OpenCL C, `short` always means "a 16 bit-integer", and `cl_short` exists to allow a stable API to be exposed to host code.  SYCL using the fixed-width types solves the same problem.

};

inline constexpr spirv_version spirv_1_0 = {1,0};
inline constexpr spirv_version spirv_1_1 = {1,1};
inline constexpr spirv_version spirv_1_2 = {1,2};
inline constexpr spirv_version spirv_1_3 = {1,3};
inline constexpr spirv_version spirv_1_4 = {1,4};
inline constexpr spirv_version spirv_1_5 = {1,5};
inline constexpr spirv_version spirv_1_6 = {1,6};

} // namespace ext::oneapi::experimental
----
!====

The meaning of the `major` and `minor` values are defined by the SPIR-V
specification.

The constant values (e.g. `spirv_1_0`) are shorthands that identify various
SPIR-V versions.
|====

==== New device information descriptors

This extension adds the following new information descriptors to
`device::get_info`.

|====
a|
[frame=all,grid=none]
!====
a!
[source]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::info::device {
struct spirv_versions {

>   using return_type = std::set<sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::spirv_version>;

Reviewer: @bashbaug also brought this up in another comment.  Should we define these to return `std::vector` instead?  That would be more consistent with all the other `get_info` queries.  Since we also have `device::ext_oneapi_supports_spirv_version`, there's not really any need to return a set here.  The main use case for the `get_info` query is to iterate over all the supported versions (e.g. to print them), and that's just as easy to do with a vector.

Author: I switched to a `std::vector` in the latest version.  It's easy enough to switch back if desired, though...

Reviewer 2: Actually, if the performance argument convinces either of you, it might even be worth using `std::unordered_set` instead.  I think that can use a hash, whereas the sorted nature of `std::set` means it needs a binary search.

Author: I really don't have a strong opinion here - let me know what you prefer.

I initially thought that there might be a performance or implementation benefit with a `std::vector` because it's a closer match to the driver APIs, but because the driver APIs represent strings as `const char*` vs `std::string` we won't directly be able to build the vectors of strings anyhow (we could for non-string values like capabilities, though).

I'm not sure how much this really matters, though, because applications shouldn't be making these queries in performance-critical code.

Reviewer 2: That's a good point. I hadn't considered the potential overhead of copying a `std::set` or `std::unordered_set`, and I'm not sure how it compares to the overhead of copying a `std::vector`.

};
} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::info::device
----
!====

_Remarks:_ Template parameter to `device::get_info`.

_Returns:_ The SPIR-V versions that are supported by the device.
When the device does not support `aspect::ext_oneapi_spirv`, this query returns
an empty set.

a|
[frame=all,grid=none]
!====
a!
[source]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::info::device {
struct spirv_extended_instruction_sets {
  using return_type = std::set<std::string>;
};
} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::info::device
----
!====

_Remarks:_ Template parameter to `device::get_info`.

_Returns:_ The SPIR-V extended instruction sets that are supported by the device.
SPIR-V extended instruction sets may be described on the SPIR-V registry.

> When the device does not support `aspect::ext_oneapi_spirv_queries`, this query
> returns an empty set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the device does not support `aspect::ext_oneapi_spirv`, this query
returns an empty set.

_Throws_: A synchronous `exception` with the `errc::feature_not_supported` error code if the device does not support `ext_oneapi_spirv_queries`.
```

@bashbaug, I think you asked in another comment about the behavior of these queries in this scenario.  This is how I think it should be.  When the device does not support SPIR-V at all, it's trivial to implement these queries and returning the empty set is correct.  If a device does not support SPIR-V at all, then it definitely doesn't support any SPIR-V extensions.  Defining the queries this way, also makes it easy for applications to do a check like this, without adding a separate test to see if the device supports SPIR-V:

```
if (dev.ext_oneapi_supports_spirv_extended_instruction_set("foo")) {
  // Submit kernel that uses the extended instruction set "foo"
}
```

Throwing `feature_not_supported` seems like a good guardrail to catch buggy applications that forget to check `aspect::ext_oneapi_spirv_queries`.  I suspect a lot of applications won't bother checking this aspect because they will assume they run with a modern driver that supports the queries.  The exception will provide an obvious failure if that assumption turns out to be untrue.

@Pennycook proposed that in the future (e.g. if this extension becomes a KHR), we could do away with `aspect::ext_oneapi_spirv_queries` because we can just assume that implementations have the necessary support for the queries.  If/when that happens, we can remove the wording about the exception because that situation will no longer be possible. 

Finally, I'd suggest changing the wording of `aspect::ext_oneapi_spirv_queries` to something along these lines:

> Indicates that the device supports queries for supported SPIR-V extended instruction sets, extensions, and capabilities.  This aspect is always `true` for any device where `aspect::ext_oneapi_spirv` is false.  In such a case, the queries indicate that the device does not support any SPIR-V extended instruction sets, extensions, or capabilities (because the device does not support SPIR-V at all).

Author: Done - the latest version throws an exception in these cases when `aspect::ext_oneapi_spirv_queries` is not supported.
